one of the debates we might say between
early Christianity and the late Roman
Empire was whether or
not an emperor could be God literally
right to be deified to put in a to be
put in a temple and you can see why that
might happen because that's someone at
the Pinnacle of a very steep hierarchy
who has a tremendous amount of power and
influence but the Christian response to
that was never confuse the specific
Sovereign with the principle of
sovereignty itself it's brilliant you
see how difficult it is to come up with
an idea like that so that even the
person who has the power is actually
subordinate to something else
subordinate to uh let's call it a Divine
principle for lack of a better word so
that even the king himself is
subordinate to the principle and we
still believe that because we believe
that our president our prime minister is
subordinate to the damn Law whatever the
body of law right there's a principle
inside that that even the leader is
subordinate to and without that you
could argue you can't even have a
civilized society because your Your
Leader immediately turns into something
that's Transcendent and all powerful and
I mean that's certainly what happened in
the Soviet Union and what happened in
maest China and what happened in Nazi
Germany because there was nothing for
the powerful to subordinate themselves
to you're supposed to be subordinate to
God so what does that mean well we're
going to tear that idea apart but partly
what it means means is that you're
subordinate even if you're Sovereign to
the principle of sovereignty itself and
then the question is what the hell is
the principle of sovereignty and I could
say we have been working that out for a
very long period of time and so that's
one of the things that we'll talk about
because the ancient Mesopotamians and
the ancient Egyptians had some very
interesting dramatic ideas about that
so just for example very briefly there
was a a daddy known as Marduk and Marduk
he was a Mesopotamian deity and imagine
this is sort of what happened is that as
an empire grew out of the post ice age
age say 15,000 years ago 10,000 years
ago all these tribes came together and
these tribes each had their own deity
their own image of the ideal but then
they started to occupy the same
territory right and so then one tribe
had God a and one tribe had God B and
you know they one could wipe the other
one out and then it would just be God a
who wins but that's not so good because
well maybe you want to trade with those
people or maybe you don't want to lose
half your population in a war something
like that so then you have to have an
argument about whose God is going to
take priority which ideal is going to
take priority and what seems to happen
is that's represented in mythology as a
battle of the gods in sort of celestial
space but from a practical perspective
it's more like an ongoing dialogue you
believe this I believe this you believe
that I believe this how are we going to
meld that together so you take God a and
you take God B and maybe what you do is
extract God C from them and you say well
God C now has the attributes of A and B
and then some other tribes come in and
then C takes them over too and so you
get like with Marduk for example he has
a multitude of names 50 different names
well those are names at least in part of
the subordinate gods that represented
the tribes that came together to make
the civilization that's part of the
process by which that abstracted ideal
is abstracted you think this is
important and it works cuz your tribe's
alive and you think this is important
and it works cuz your tribe is alive and
so we'll take the best of both if we can
manage it and ex extract out something
that's even more abstract that covers
both of us if we can do it and one of
the things that's really interesting
about Marduk I'll just give you a couple
of of his features but he has eyes all
the way around his head he's elected by
all the other gods to be king God so
that's the first thing that's quite cool
and they elect him because they're
they're facing a terrible threat sort of
like a flood and a monster combined
something like that and Mar basically
says that if they elect him top God then
he'll go out and stop the flood monster
and and and they won't all get wiped out
it's a serious threat it's chaos itself
making its comeback and so all the gods
agree and marock is a new manifestation
he's got eyes all the way around his
head and he speaks magic words and then
he also goes out and when he fight
fights he fights this deity called
Tiamat and and we need to know that
because the word Tiamat is associated
with the word Tome T H O M and T is the
chaos that God makes order out of at the
beginning of time in Genesis so it's
linked very tightly to this story and
Marduk with his eyes and his capacity to
speak magic words goes out to confront
tyat who's like a watery Sea Dragon
something like that uh it's a classic
it's a classic St George story go out
and and wreak havoc on the dragon and he
cuts her into pieces and he makes the
world out of her pieces and that's the
world that human beings live in and the
Mesopotamian Emperor acted out Marduk he
was allowed to be emperor in so far as
he was a good Marduk and so that meant
that he had eyes all the way around his
head and he could speak magic he could
speak properly and so that we're
starting to understand there at that
point the essence of leadership right
because what's leadership it's the
capacity to see what the hell's in front
of your face and maybe in every
direction and then the capacity to use
your language properly in a
transformative Manner and to transform
chaos into order and God only know how
knows how long it took the Mesopotamians
to figure that out and the best they
could do is dramatize it but it's
staggeringly brilliant you know it's
it's by no means obvious and this chaos
this chaos is a very strange thing and
this is the chaos that God wrestled with
at the beginning of time chaos is what
it it's half psychologic iCal and half
real there's no other way to really
describe it the chaos is what you
encounter when you're thrown into deep
confusion right when your World falls
apart when when you encounter something
that blows you into pieces when your
dreams die when you're betrayed it's the
chaos that emerges and the chaos is
everything at once and it's too much for
you and that's for sure and it pulls you
down into the underworld and all that's
where the dragons are and all you've got
at that point is your capacity to bloody
well keep your eyes open and to speak as
carefully and clearly as you can and
maybe if you're lucky you'll get through
it that way and come out the other side
and it's taken people a very long time
to figure that out and it looks to me
like the idea is erected on the platform
of our ancient ancestors maybe tens of
millions of years ago because we seem to
represent that which disturbs us deeply
using the same system that we use to
represent like
serpenti serpenti or other carnivorous
predators
sleep is a foundation for our mental and
physical health in other words you've
got to have a consistent nighttime
routine to function at your best but if
you're struggling with sleep then you've
got to check out Beam Beam isn't your
run-ofthe-mill sleep aid it's a
concoction carefully crafted to help you
rest without the grogginess that often
accompanies other sleep remedies a bunch
of us here at the daily wire count on
beam's dream powder to knock us out and
sleep better through the night so we can
show up ready for work the next day just
mix beam dream into hot water or milk
stir or froth and then enjoy before
bedtime then wake up feeling freshed
without the next day grogginess caused
by other Sleep Products dream contains a
powerful allnatural blend of RI
magnesium eleanine appenine and
melatonin to help you fall asleep stay
asleep and wake up refreshed and with it
now being available in delicious flavors
like cinnamon cocoa chocolate peanut
butter and mint chip better sleep has
never tasted better and today listeners
of this show can get a special discount
on beam's dream powder get up to 40% off
for a limited time when you go to shop
beam.com Peterson and use code Peterson
at checkout that's shop B ./ Peterson
and use code Peterson for up to 40%
off you know we're biological creatures
right so when we've formulated our
capacity to abstract our Strange
capacity to abstract and use language we
still have all those underlying systems
that were there when we were only
animals and we have to use those systems
they're they're part of the emotional
and motivational architecture of our
thinking and part of the reason we can
demonize our enemies who upset our
axioms is because we perceive them as if
they're carnivorous Predators we do it
with the same system and that's chaos
itself the thing that always threatens
us right the snakes that came to the
trees when we lived in them like 60
million years ago it's the same damn
systems so the mic story is partly the
story of using attention and language to
confront those things that most threaten
us and some of those things are real
real world threats but some of them are
psychological threats which are just as
profound but far more abstract we but we
use the same systems to represent them
it's why you freeze if you're frightened
right you're a prey animal you're like a
rabbit you've seen a you've seen
something that's going to eat you you
freeze and that way you're paralyzed
you're turned to stone which is what you
do when you see a Medusa with a head
full of St snakes right you're turned to
stone you're paralyzed and the reason
you do that is because you're using the
Predator detection system to protect
yourself your heart rate goes way up and
you get ready to
move things that upset us rely on that
system and then the story the martic
story for example is the idea that if
there are things that upset you chaotic
terrible Serpentine monstrous underworld
things that threaten you the best thing
to do is to open your eyes and get your
speech organized and go out and confront
the thing and make the world out of it
and it's it's staggering when I when I
read that story and started to
understand it just blew me away that
it's such a profound idea and we know
it's true too because we know in
Psychotherapy for example that you're
much better off to confront your fears
headon than you are to wait and let them
find you and so partly what you do if
you're a psychotherapist is you help
people break their fears into little
pieces the things that upset them and
then to encounter them one by one and
master them and so you're teaching this
process of Eternal Mastery over the
strange and chaotic world and that all
of that makes up some of the background
we haven't even got to the first
sentence of the biblical stories yet
but but all of that makes up the
background so you have to think that
we've extracted this story this this or
this strange collection of stories with
all its errors and its and its
repetitions and and its peculiarities
out of the entire like the entire
history that we've been able to collect
ideas is and it's the best we've been
able to do and I know there are other
religious Traditions I'm not concerned
about that at the moment because we can
use this as an as an example but it's
the best we've been able to do and what
I'm hoping is that we can return to the
stories in some sense with an open mind
and see if there's something there that
we actually need
[Music]